'''Brigadeiro''' is a simple Brazilian chocolate fudge candy created in the 1920's, and named after Brigadeiro Eduardo Gomes, and its shape is a reproduction of that of some varieties of chocolate truffle chocolate truffles.

Eduardo Gomes was a Brazilian Air Force brigadier (thus the title "Brigadeiro", in Portuguese), who first gained notoriety for playing a part in quashing a communist coup in Rio de Janeiro. Later he ran unsuccessfully for the presidency in 1946 and 1950, during a brief breeze of democracy that blew in Brazil after the Second World War. This was a time of shortage of traditional imports such as nuts and fruits               because of the war. But, at the same time, Nestlé™ was introducing its chocolate powder in the country.

Although Brazil is a major producer of cocoa beans, it is believed that the creation and success of the candy was a combination of opportunities: the Multinational corporation multinationalNestlé™, which introduced chocolate powder; the creators who named it after a famous politician, the need to find a replacement to imported sweets; and its ease of manufacture.


There are two ways to serve brigadeiro. The traditional method is to roll the candy into balls which are then covered
in sprinkles. The second method is to leave the candy slightly more fluid and to eat it with a spoon. 
== Recipe ==
* 1 can of sweet [[condensed milk]]
* 3 tablespoons of cocoa powder
* 1 tablespoon butter or margarine
* Chocolate sprinkles

'''On the stove:'''
Put all the ingredients (except for the sprinkles) in a pan and mix them well. Put it on the stove, on medium-low heat. Stir continuously. If you want a creamy brigadeiro, cook until desired thickness is reached. For a birthday party, cook it until it gets so thick that you can see the bottom of the pan while stirring it.

'''In the microwave:'''
Put all the ingredients in a large bowl and mix them well. Place it in the microwave on high heat for 3 minutes. Stir it and put it on high heat for an additional 3 minutes. When ready stir it until the bubbles are gone and you will have creamy brigadeiro. If you want to roll it for a party, microwave for an additional 3 minutes on high heat. 
NOTE: The time can vary depending on your microwave.

'''To roll it:'''
If you want a birthday brigadeiro, make the cream very thick. Wait until the cream is cold. Roll it into small ball shapes and cover them with chocolate sprinkles. Serve in small cupcake holders.

'''Another option:'''
Some people make the creamy version for parties too. If you like it, serve it in very small glasses or dixie cups, topped with sprinkles.

[[he:בריגדיירו]]
[[nl:Brigadeiro]]
[[pt:Brigadeiro (doce)]]